---
layout: post
styles: blog
title:  "The DOMS Are Real"
permalink: blog/doms
date:   2016-05-11 13:45:00
categories: fitness recovery tips
author: Brandon
post-number: 05
post-style:
intro: Still sore a few days after working out? It's delayed onset muscle soreness doing you like that.
---
## The First Week Sucks

The true origin of "<em>walking with a stick up your ass</em>" comes from an observation of people attempting to walk the days following their leg day routine. I have a strong waddle happening today, so I wanted to share some of my tips for avoiding the inevitable DOMS that will show up at some point in an active lifestyle.


##### My strategies to minimize the effects of DOMS:

### 1. Stay Hydrated

It's well understood that you need to be taking in water every day just go get by. With your body running on overdrive both repairing muscles and utilizing more resources than it normally does, it needs that water. Water helps to shuttle around the essential vitamins, minerals, and proteins your body requires to repair and grow the muscles you've just exercised. Up your water intake as you start becoming more active, and you'll help to reduce the pains that come from strenuous exercise.

### 2. Sleep

While awake, your body has one task: Do everything it can to keep you aware, active, and alive. This means there's no repairing or reconstruction happening to any systems that are not life threatening. This makes consistent sleep an important and healthy habit to build into your lifestyle. While you're asleep, your body is hard at work repairing systems that it will need to have running at their most optimal states while awake. Think of a car: You can't repair the car while you're driving down the highway. Giving your body more time to do these repairs means less time aching and in pain while you're awake.

### 3. Eat

The hardest part of starting a workout routine isn't the exercise, it's the diet. When you feel the aches and pains of your workout, use it as a reminder to hit all of your dietary goals. If you're trying to build muscle, keep a bag of peanuts at your desk or make yourself a fruit and protein shake. Your diet will shape the outcomes of your active exercise, your resting repair, and your mental focus. Give your diet the attention it deserves and you'll help to avoid the negative feelings that can come with starting a new active lifestyle.

### 4. Keep Moving

You're going to feel the frustration of tight muscles and aching pains from areas of your body you didn't know could feel that way. Staying sedentary is going to make this exponentially worse. It's tough to keep moving if you work a desk job, right? It's only tough because you've convinced yourself it is. Every 30 to 45 minutes, stand up and stretch out like you would with a giant yawn. Bounce on your toes some, get all of the muscles in your body moving just a bit more than they were while sitting in that desk chair. If you can, take the occasional few minute walk, or take advantage of a lunch break and take a 30 minute walk. A little bit of movement will help you to avoid the mental fatigue that comes with muscle pain, keeping you more prodcutive during the day.

### 5. Stay Motivated

Waking up and being unable to roll out of bed without making a series of noises better suited for a science fiction movie takes its toll on self-motivation. As long as your pain is only from DOMS and not a real injury, you need to push through it. Sometimes you'll push harder than you should and no matter how well you prepare yourself with good food, plentiful rest, smart movement, and staying hydrated, you'll still manage to feel your exercise for the next few days. Keep your goals in mind, especially when you first start. Typically, DOMS sets in when you're using muscles in a way they need to adapt to, such as lifting weights after having a sedentary lifestyle. This will pass once your body adapts your muscle and nervous systems to your new lifestyle.


I would love to hear what your DOMS-avoidance strategies are. [Send me a tweet](http://www.twitter.com/bybrandonbrown) and let me know what you do to keep the muscle pain away.
